README.md, before:

<div align="center">

# 🎯 DistAwareAug

**Distribution-Aware Data Augmentation for Imbalanced Learning**

[![Python Version](https://img.shields.io/badge/python-3.8%2B-blue.svg)](https://www.python.org/downloads/)
[![License: MIT](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-MIT-yellow.svg)](https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT)
[![Tests](https://img.shields.io/badge/tests-passing-brightgreen.svg)]()
[![Code style: black](https://img.shields.io/badge/code%20style-black-000000.svg)](https://github.com/psf/black)

*Intelligent oversampling that preserves statistical distributions and ensures sample diversity*

[Features](#features) •
[Installation](#installation) •
[Quick Start](#quick-start) •
[Documentation](#documentation) •
[Contributing](#contributing) •
[Citation](#citation)

</div>

---

## 📖 Overview

**DistAwareAug** introduces a new paradigm for handling imbalanced datasets: **statistically-governed augmentation**. Unlike traditional methods like SMOTE that interpolate between samples, DistAwareAug:

1. 📊 **Learns the statistical distribution** of minority class features (mean, variance, covariance)
2. 🎲 **Generates synthetic samples** from fitted distributions (KDE or Gaussian)
3. 🎯 **Ensures diversity** through distance-based filtering
4. ✅ **Preserves feature bounds** and avoids unrealistic outliers

### Why DistAwareAug?

| Feature | SMOTE | BorderlineSMOTE | ADASYN | **DistAwareAug** |
|---------|-------|-----------------|--------|------------------|
| Preserves distributions | ❌ | ❌ | ❌ | ✅ |
| Diversity control | ⚠️ | ⚠️ | ⚠️ | ✅ |
| Avoids interpolation artifacts | ❌ | ❌ | ❌ | ✅ |
| Statistical governance | ❌ | ❌ | ❌ | ✅ |
| Flexible distribution methods | ❌ | ❌ | ❌ | ✅ (KDE/Gaussian) |

---

## ✨ Features

- 🔬 **Distribution Fitting**: KDE (Kernel Density Estimation) or Gaussian distributions
- 📏 **Distance Metrics**: Euclidean, Manhattan, Cosine, Minkowski, and more
- 🎲 **Diversity Control**: Configurable threshold for sample uniqueness
- 🔄 **scikit-learn Compatible**: Drop-in replacement for SMOTE and similar methods
- ⚡ **Performance**: Optimized for speed with Gaussian method
- 📊 **Quality Metrics**: Built-in diversity scoring and validation
- 🛡️ **Robust**: Handles edge cases, singular matrices, and various data types

---

## 🚀 Installation

### From Source (Recommended for Development)

```bash
# Clone the repository
git clone https://github.com/Ayo-Cyber/DistAwareAug.git
cd DistAwareAug

# Create virtual environment
python -m venv venv
source venv/bin/activate  # On Windows: venv\Scripts\activate

# Install in editable mode with all dependencies
pip install -e ".[all]"
```

### For Users (Once Published to PyPI)

```bash
pip install distawareaug
```

### Minimal Installation

```bash
pip install distawareaug
```

### With Optional Dependencies

```bash
# For development (testing, linting, formatting)
pip install distawareaug[dev]

# For running examples
pip install distawareaug[examples]

# For building documentation
pip install distawareaug[docs]

# Everything
pip install distawareaug[all]
```

---

## 🎯 Quick Start

### Basic Usage

```python
from distawareaug import DistAwareAugmentor
from sklearn.datasets import make_classification
from sklearn.model_selection import train_test_split
from sklearn.ensemble import RandomForestClassifier

# Create imbalanced dataset
X, y = make_classification(
    n_samples=1000,
    n_features=20,
    weights=[0.9, 0.1],  # 90% majority, 10% minority
    random_state=42
)

X_train, X_test, y_train, y_test = train_test_split(
    X, y, test_size=0.3, random_state=42
)

# Initialize DistAwareAugmentor
augmentor = DistAwareAugmentor(
    sampling_strategy='auto',      # Balance all classes
    diversity_threshold=0.1,       # Minimum distance between samples
    distribution_method='kde',     # or 'gaussian' for speed
    random_state=42
)

# Oversample the training data
X_resampled, y_resampled = augmentor.fit_resample(X_train, y_train)

# Train classifier on balanced data
clf = RandomForestClassifier(random_state=42)
clf.fit(X_resampled, y_resampled)

# Evaluate
score = clf.score(X_test, y_test)
print(f"Test Accuracy: {score:.4f}")
```

### Advanced Usage

```python
from distawareaug import DistAwareAugmentor, DistanceMetrics
from sklearn.preprocessing import StandardScaler

# Scale features for better diversity control
scaler = StandardScaler()
X_train_scaled = scaler.fit_transform(X_train)

# Custom configuration
augmentor = DistAwareAugmentor(
    sampling_strategy={0: 0, 1: 500},  # Generate 500 samples for class 1
    diversity_threshold=0.15,
    distribution_method='gaussian',
    distance_metric='manhattan',
    random_state=42
)

X_resampled, y_resampled = augmentor.fit_resample(X_train_scaled, y_train)

# Analyze diversity
dm = DistanceMetrics(metric='euclidean')
diversity = dm.diversity_score(X_resampled[len(X_train):])
print(f"Synthetic Sample Diversity: {diversity:.4f}")
```

### Using with scikit-learn Pipeline

```python
from sklearn.pipeline import Pipeline
from sklearn.preprocessing import StandardScaler
from distawareaug import DistAwareAugmentor
from sklearn.svm import SVC

# Create pipeline
pipeline = Pipeline([
    ('scaler', StandardScaler()),
    ('augmentor', DistAwareAugmentor(distribution_method='gaussian')),
    ('classifier', SVC())
])

# Note: Augmentor only applies to training data
# Use manually for proper train/test separation
```

---

## 📚 Documentation

### Core Components

#### `DistAwareAugmentor`

Main class for oversampling imbalanced datasets.

**Parameters:**
- `sampling_strategy` (str or dict, default='auto'): How to balance classes
  - `'auto'`: Balance all classes to majority class size
  - `dict`: Specify number of samples per class, e.g., `{0: 100, 1: 200}`
- `diversity_threshold` (float, default=0.1): Minimum distance for sample acceptance
  - **Important**: Scale your features for consistent behavior!
- `distribution_method` (str, default='kde'): Distribution fitting method
  - `'kde'`: Kernel Density Estimation (more accurate, slower)
  - `'gaussian'`: Multivariate Gaussian (faster, assumes normality)
- `distance_metric` (str, default='euclidean'): Distance metric for diversity
  - Options: `'euclidean'`, `'manhattan'`, `'cosine'`, `'minkowski'`, etc.
- `random_state` (int, default=None): Random seed for reproducibility

**Methods:**
- `fit(X, y)`: Fit the augmentor to training data
- `resample(X, y)`: Generate synthetic samples
- `fit_resample(X, y)`: Fit and resample in one step

#### `DistanceMetrics`

Utilities for computing distances and diversity scores.

**Key Methods:**
- `compute_distances(X, Y)`: Pairwise distances between samples
- `nearest_neighbor_distances(X, Y)`: Distance to nearest neighbor
- `diversity_score(samples, reference)`: Measure sample diversity
- `filter_diverse_samples(samples, threshold)`: Keep only diverse samples

#### `DistributionFitter`

Fits statistical distributions to feature data.

**Supported Distributions:**
- `'kde'`: Kernel Density Estimation
- `'gaussian'`: Multivariate Gaussian
- `'uniform'`: Uniform distribution (for testing)

---

## 🧪 Testing

### Run All Tests

```bash
# Run tests with coverage
pytest

# Run with verbose output
pytest -v

# Run specific test file
pytest tests/test_augmentor.py

# Run tests matching pattern
pytest -k "test_diversity"
```

### Run Tests with Coverage Report

```bash
# Generate HTML coverage report
pytest --cov=distawareaug --cov-report=html

# Open coverage report
open htmlcov/index.html  # macOS
xdg-open htmlcov/index.html  # Linux
start htmlcov/index.html  # Windows
```

### Test Structure

```
tests/
├── test_augmentor.py       # Tests for DistAwareAugmentor
├── test_distance.py        # Tests for distance metrics
├── test_distribution.py    # Tests for distribution fitting
└── __pycache__/
```

### Writing New Tests

```python
import pytest
import numpy as np
from distawareaug import DistAwareAugmentor

def test_my_feature():
    """Test description."""
    X = np.random.randn(100, 5)
    y = np.random.randint(0, 2, 100)
    
    augmentor = DistAwareAugmentor(random_state=42)
    X_resampled, y_resampled = augmentor.fit_resample(X, y)
    
    assert len(X_resampled) >= len(X)
    assert len(np.unique(y_resampled)) == len(np.unique(y))
```

---

## 🤝 Contributing

We welcome contributions! Here's how to get started:

### Setting Up Development Environment

```bash
# Fork and clone the repository
git clone https://github.com/YOUR_USERNAME/DistAwareAug.git
cd DistAwareAug

# Create virtual environment
python -m venv venv
source venv/bin/activate  # Windows: venv\Scripts\activate

# Install in development mode with all dependencies
pip install -e ".[dev]"

# Install pre-commit hooks (optional but recommended)
pre-commit install
```

### Development Workflow

1. **Create a new branch** for your feature/fix:
   ```bash
   git checkout -b feature/your-feature-name
   ```

2. **Make your changes** and ensure code quality:
   ```bash
   # Format code
   black distawareaug tests
   
   # Sort imports
   isort distawareaug tests
   
   # Check linting
   flake8 distawareaug tests
   
   # Type checking (optional)
   mypy distawareaug
   ```

3. **Write/update tests**:
   ```bash
   # Run tests
   pytest -v
   
   # Check coverage
   pytest --cov=distawareaug --cov-report=term-missing
   ```

4. **Update documentation** if needed:
   - Update README.md for user-facing changes
   - Update docstrings for API changes
   - Add examples for new features

5. **Commit your changes**:
   ```bash
   git add .
   git commit -m "feat: add your feature description"
   ```
   
   Follow [Conventional Commits](https://www.conventionalcommits.org/):
   - `feat:` New feature
   - `fix:` Bug fix
   - `docs:` Documentation changes
   - `test:` Test changes
   - `refactor:` Code refactoring
   - `perf:` Performance improvements
   - `chore:` Maintenance tasks

6. **Push and create Pull Request**:
   ```bash
   git push origin feature/your-feature-name
   ```
   Then open a PR on GitHub with a clear description.

### Code Style Guidelines

- **Line length**: 100 characters (enforced by Black)
- **Docstrings**: Google-style or NumPy-style
- **Type hints**: Encouraged but not required
- **Naming**: 
  - `snake_case` for functions/variables
  - `PascalCase` for classes
  - `UPPER_CASE` for constants

### Example Contribution Areas

- 🐛 **Bug Fixes**: Found an issue? Submit a PR!
- ✨ **New Features**: 
  - Additional distribution methods
  - New distance metrics
  - Performance optimizations
- 📚 **Documentation**: Improve examples, tutorials, docstrings
- 🧪 **Tests**: Increase test coverage
- 🎨 **Examples**: Add Jupyter notebooks demonstrating use cases

### Questions?

- Open an [Issue](https://github.com/Ayo-Cyber/DistAwareAug/issues) for bugs or feature requests
- Start a [Discussion](https://github.com/Ayo-Cyber/DistAwareAug/discussions) for questions

---

## 📊 Examples

Explore comprehensive examples in the `examples/` directory:

### Available Notebooks

1. **`demo_synthetic.ipynb`**: Introduction to DistAwareAug with synthetic data
2. **`compare_smote.ipynb`**: Benchmark comparison with SMOTE, ADASYN, etc.

### Running Examples

```bash
# Install example dependencies
pip install ".[examples]"

# Start Jupyter
jupyter notebook examples/
```

---

## 🔧 Troubleshooting

### Common Issues

#### 1. **Low Diversity / Few Samples Generated**

**Problem**: `diversity_threshold` is too high for your feature scales.

**Solution**: Scale your features first!
```python
from sklearn.preprocessing import StandardScaler

scaler = StandardScaler()
X_train_scaled = scaler.fit_transform(X_train)

augmentor = DistAwareAugmentor(diversity_threshold=0.1)
X_resampled, y_resampled = augmentor.fit_resample(X_train_scaled, y_train)
```

#### 2. **Singular Matrix Errors**

**Problem**: Too few samples or perfectly correlated features.

**Solution**: DistAwareAug handles this automatically, but you can:
- Use `distribution_method='gaussian'` which adds regularization
- Ensure sufficient samples (>10 per class recommended)
- Remove perfectly correlated features

#### 3. **Slow Performance**

**Problem**: KDE is slow for large datasets.

**Solution**: Use Gaussian method for speed:
```python
augmentor = DistAwareAugmentor(distribution_method='gaussian')
```

#### 4. **Import Errors**

**Problem**: Missing dependencies.

**Solution**:
```bash
pip install -e ".[all]"
```

---

## 📈 Performance Tips

1. **Scale your features** with `StandardScaler` for consistent `diversity_threshold` behavior
2. **Use `distribution_method='gaussian'`** for large datasets (10x faster than KDE)
3. **Adjust `diversity_threshold`**:
   - Higher (0.2-0.5): More diverse, fewer samples
   - Lower (0.05-0.1): More samples, less diversity
4. **Set `random_state`** for reproducible results
5. **Start with small datasets** to tune parameters before scaling up

---

## 📄 License

This project is licensed under the MIT License - see the [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for details.

---

## 🙏 Acknowledgments

- Inspired by SMOTE and related oversampling techniques
- Built with scikit-learn, NumPy, SciPy, and pandas
- Thanks to the open-source community

---

## 📬 Contact

- **Author**: Atunrase Ayo
- **Email**: atunraseayomide@gmail.com
- **GitHub**: [@Ayo-Cyber](https://github.com/Ayo-Cyber)
- **Repository**: [DistAwareAug](https://github.com/Ayo-Cyber/DistAwareAug)

---

## 📚 Citation

If you use DistAwareAug in your research, please cite:

```bibtex
@software{distawareaug2025,
  author = {Atunrase, Ayo},
  title = {DistAwareAug: Distribution-Aware Data Augmentation for Imbalanced Learning},
  year = {2025},
  publisher = {GitHub},
  url = {https://github.com/Ayo-Cyber/DistAwareAug}
}
```

---

## 🗺️ Roadmap

- [ ] Publish to PyPI
- [ ] Add more distribution methods (t-distribution, mixture models)
- [ ] GPU acceleration for large-scale augmentation
- [ ] Web-based interactive demo
- [ ] Integration with popular ML frameworks (PyTorch, TensorFlow)
- [ ] Automated hyperparameter tuning
- [ ] Real-world dataset benchmarks

---

<div align="center">

**⭐ Star this repo if you find it useful! ⭐**

[Report Bug](https://github.com/Ayo-Cyber/DistAwareAug/issues) •
[Request Feature](https://github.com/Ayo-Cyber/DistAwareAug/issues) •
[Contribute](https://github.com/Ayo-Cyber/DistAwareAug/pulls)

</div>

Commit message:

Refactor and enhance statistical modules, add CI scripts
Improves code style and consistency across all modules, refactors statistical governance and pipeline for better structure and analysis, and adds scripts (run_ci_tests.py, run_ci_tests.sh) for running CI checks locally. Updates README with instructions for local CI testing. No functional changes to core augmentation logic, but statistical analysis and configuration handling are now more robust and maintainable.

README.md, after:

<div align="center">

# 🎯 DistAwareAug

**Distribution-Aware Data Augmentation for Imbalanced Learning**

[![Python Version](https://img.shields.io/badge/python-3.8%2B-blue.svg)](https://www.python.org/downloads/)
[![License: MIT](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-MIT-yellow.svg)](https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT)
[![Tests](https://img.shields.io/badge/tests-passing-brightgreen.svg)]()
[![Code style: black](https://img.shields.io/badge/code%20style-black-000000.svg)](https://github.com/psf/black)

*Intelligent oversampling that preserves statistical distributions and ensures sample diversity*

[Features](#features) •
[Installation](#installation) •
[Quick Start](#quick-start) •
[Documentation](#documentation) •
[Contributing](#contributing) •
[Citation](#citation)

</div>

---

## 📖 Overview

**DistAwareAug** introduces a new paradigm for handling imbalanced datasets: **statistically-governed augmentation**. Unlike traditional methods like SMOTE that interpolate between samples, DistAwareAug:

1. 📊 **Learns the statistical distribution** of minority class features (mean, variance, covariance)
2. 🎲 **Generates synthetic samples** from fitted distributions (KDE or Gaussian)
3. 🎯 **Ensures diversity** through distance-based filtering
4. ✅ **Preserves feature bounds** and avoids unrealistic outliers

### Why DistAwareAug?

| Feature | SMOTE | BorderlineSMOTE | ADASYN | **DistAwareAug** |
|---------|-------|-----------------|--------|------------------|
| Preserves distributions | ❌ | ❌ | ❌ | ✅ |
| Diversity control | ⚠️ | ⚠️ | ⚠️ | ✅ |
| Avoids interpolation artifacts | ❌ | ❌ | ❌ | ✅ |
| Statistical governance | ❌ | ❌ | ❌ | ✅ |
| Flexible distribution methods | ❌ | ❌ | ❌ | ✅ (KDE/Gaussian) |

---

## ✨ Features

- 🔬 **Distribution Fitting**: KDE (Kernel Density Estimation) or Gaussian distributions
- 📏 **Distance Metrics**: Euclidean, Manhattan, Cosine, Minkowski, and more
- 🎲 **Diversity Control**: Configurable threshold for sample uniqueness
- 🔄 **scikit-learn Compatible**: Drop-in replacement for SMOTE and similar methods
- ⚡ **Performance**: Optimized for speed with Gaussian method
- 📊 **Quality Metrics**: Built-in diversity scoring and validation
- 🛡️ **Robust**: Handles edge cases, singular matrices, and various data types

---

## 🚀 Installation

### From Source (Recommended for Development)

```bash
# Clone the repository
git clone https://github.com/Ayo-Cyber/DistAwareAug.git
cd DistAwareAug

# Create virtual environment
python -m venv venv
source venv/bin/activate  # On Windows: venv\Scripts\activate

# Install in editable mode with all dependencies
pip install -e ".[all]"
```

### For Users (Once Published to PyPI)

```bash
pip install distawareaug
```

### Minimal Installation

```bash
pip install distawareaug
```

### With Optional Dependencies

```bash
# For development (testing, linting, formatting)
pip install distawareaug[dev]

# For running examples
pip install distawareaug[examples]

# For building documentation
pip install distawareaug[docs]

# Everything
pip install distawareaug[all]
```

---

## 🎯 Quick Start

### Basic Usage

```python
from distawareaug import DistAwareAugmentor
from sklearn.datasets import make_classification
from sklearn.model_selection import train_test_split
from sklearn.ensemble import RandomForestClassifier

# Create imbalanced dataset
X, y = make_classification(
    n_samples=1000,
    n_features=20,
    weights=[0.9, 0.1],  # 90% majority, 10% minority
    random_state=42
)

X_train, X_test, y_train, y_test = train_test_split(
    X, y, test_size=0.3, random_state=42
)

# Initialize DistAwareAugmentor
augmentor = DistAwareAugmentor(
    sampling_strategy='auto',      # Balance all classes
    diversity_threshold=0.1,       # Minimum distance between samples
    distribution_method='kde',     # or 'gaussian' for speed
    random_state=42
)

# Oversample the training data
X_resampled, y_resampled = augmentor.fit_resample(X_train, y_train)

# Train classifier on balanced data
clf = RandomForestClassifier(random_state=42)
clf.fit(X_resampled, y_resampled)

# Evaluate
score = clf.score(X_test, y_test)
print(f"Test Accuracy: {score:.4f}")
```

### Advanced Usage

```python
from distawareaug import DistAwareAugmentor, DistanceMetrics
from sklearn.preprocessing import StandardScaler

# Scale features for better diversity control
scaler = StandardScaler()
X_train_scaled = scaler.fit_transform(X_train)

# Custom configuration
augmentor = DistAwareAugmentor(
    sampling_strategy={0: 0, 1: 500},  # Generate 500 samples for class 1
    diversity_threshold=0.15,
    distribution_method='gaussian',
    distance_metric='manhattan',
    random_state=42
)

X_resampled, y_resampled = augmentor.fit_resample(X_train_scaled, y_train)

# Analyze diversity
dm = DistanceMetrics(metric='euclidean')
diversity = dm.diversity_score(X_resampled[len(X_train):])
print(f"Synthetic Sample Diversity: {diversity:.4f}")
```

### Using with scikit-learn Pipeline

```python
from sklearn.pipeline import Pipeline
from sklearn.preprocessing import StandardScaler
from distawareaug import DistAwareAugmentor
from sklearn.svm import SVC

# Create pipeline
pipeline = Pipeline([
    ('scaler', StandardScaler()),
    ('augmentor', DistAwareAugmentor(distribution_method='gaussian')),
    ('classifier', SVC())
])

# Note: Augmentor only applies to training data
# Use manually for proper train/test separation
```

---

## 📚 Documentation

### Core Components

#### `DistAwareAugmentor`

Main class for oversampling imbalanced datasets.

**Parameters:**
- `sampling_strategy` (str or dict, default='auto'): How to balance classes
  - `'auto'`: Balance all classes to majority class size
  - `dict`: Specify number of samples per class, e.g., `{0: 100, 1: 200}`
- `diversity_threshold` (float, default=0.1): Minimum distance for sample acceptance
  - **Important**: Scale your features for consistent behavior!
- `distribution_method` (str, default='kde'): Distribution fitting method
  - `'kde'`: Kernel Density Estimation (more accurate, slower)
  - `'gaussian'`: Multivariate Gaussian (faster, assumes normality)
- `distance_metric` (str, default='euclidean'): Distance metric for diversity
  - Options: `'euclidean'`, `'manhattan'`, `'cosine'`, `'minkowski'`, etc.
- `random_state` (int, default=None): Random seed for reproducibility

**Methods:**
- `fit(X, y)`: Fit the augmentor to training data
- `resample(X, y)`: Generate synthetic samples
- `fit_resample(X, y)`: Fit and resample in one step

#### `DistanceMetrics`

Utilities for computing distances and diversity scores.

**Key Methods:**
- `compute_distances(X, Y)`: Pairwise distances between samples
- `nearest_neighbor_distances(X, Y)`: Distance to nearest neighbor
- `diversity_score(samples, reference)`: Measure sample diversity
- `filter_diverse_samples(samples, threshold)`: Keep only diverse samples

#### `DistributionFitter`

Fits statistical distributions to feature data.

**Supported Distributions:**
- `'kde'`: Kernel Density Estimation
- `'gaussian'`: Multivariate Gaussian
- `'uniform'`: Uniform distribution (for testing)

---

## 🧪 Testing

### Run All Tests

```bash
# Run tests with coverage
pytest

# Run with verbose output
pytest -v

# Run specific test file
pytest tests/test_augmentor.py

# Run tests matching pattern
pytest -k "test_diversity"
```

### Run Tests with Coverage Report

```bash
# Generate HTML coverage report
pytest --cov=distawareaug --cov-report=html

# Open coverage report
open htmlcov/index.html  # macOS
xdg-open htmlcov/index.html  # Linux
start htmlcov/index.html  # Windows
```

### Test Structure

```
tests/
├── test_augmentor.py       # Tests for DistAwareAugmentor
├── test_distance.py        # Tests for distance metrics
├── test_distribution.py    # Tests for distribution fitting
└── __pycache__/
```

### Writing New Tests

```python
import pytest
import numpy as np
from distawareaug import DistAwareAugmentor

def test_my_feature():
    """Test description."""
    X = np.random.randn(100, 5)
    y = np.random.randint(0, 2, 100)
    
    augmentor = DistAwareAugmentor(random_state=42)
    X_resampled, y_resampled = augmentor.fit_resample(X, y)
    
    assert len(X_resampled) >= len(X)
    assert len(np.unique(y_resampled)) == len(np.unique(y))
```

### Run CI Tests Locally

Before pushing, run the same checks that GitHub Actions will run:

```bash
# Run all CI checks locally (formatting, linting, tests)
sh run_ci_tests.sh
```

This script will:
1. ✅ Check code formatting with Black
2. ✅ Check import sorting with isort
3. ✅ Run linting with flake8
4. ✅ Run all tests with pytest
5. ✅ Generate coverage report

Fix any issues before committing!

---

## 🤝 Contributing

We welcome contributions! Here's how to get started:

### Setting Up Development Environment

```bash
# Fork and clone the repository
git clone https://github.com/YOUR_USERNAME/DistAwareAug.git
cd DistAwareAug

# Create virtual environment
python -m venv venv
source venv/bin/activate  # Windows: venv\Scripts\activate

# Install in development mode with all dependencies
pip install -e ".[dev]"

# Install pre-commit hooks (optional but recommended)
pre-commit install
```

### Development Workflow

1. **Create a new branch** for your feature/fix:
   ```bash
   git checkout -b feature/your-feature-name
   ```

2. **Make your changes** and ensure code quality:
   ```bash
   # Format code
   black distawareaug tests
   
   # Sort imports
   isort distawareaug tests
   
   # Check linting
   flake8 distawareaug tests
   
   # Type checking (optional)
   mypy distawareaug
   ```

3. **Write/update tests**:
   ```bash
   # Run tests
   pytest -v
   
   # Check coverage
   pytest --cov=distawareaug --cov-report=term-missing
   ```

4. **Update documentation** if needed:
   - Update README.md for user-facing changes
   - Update docstrings for API changes
   - Add examples for new features

5. **Commit your changes**:
   ```bash
   git add .
   git commit -m "feat: add your feature description"
   ```
   
   Follow [Conventional Commits](https://www.conventionalcommits.org/):
   - `feat:` New feature
   - `fix:` Bug fix
   - `docs:` Documentation changes
   - `test:` Test changes
   - `refactor:` Code refactoring
   - `perf:` Performance improvements
   - `chore:` Maintenance tasks

6. **Push and create Pull Request**:
   ```bash
   git push origin feature/your-feature-name
   ```
   Then open a PR on GitHub with a clear description.

### Code Style Guidelines

- **Line length**: 100 characters (enforced by Black)
- **Docstrings**: Google-style or NumPy-style
- **Type hints**: Encouraged but not required
- **Naming**: 
  - `snake_case` for functions/variables
  - `PascalCase` for classes
  - `UPPER_CASE` for constants

### Example Contribution Areas

- 🐛 **Bug Fixes**: Found an issue? Submit a PR!
- ✨ **New Features**: 
  - Additional distribution methods
  - New distance metrics
  - Performance optimizations
- 📚 **Documentation**: Improve examples, tutorials, docstrings
- 🧪 **Tests**: Increase test coverage
- 🎨 **Examples**: Add Jupyter notebooks demonstrating use cases

### Questions?

- Open an [Issue](https://github.com/Ayo-Cyber/DistAwareAug/issues) for bugs or feature requests
- Start a [Discussion](https://github.com/Ayo-Cyber/DistAwareAug/discussions) for questions

---

## 📊 Examples

Explore comprehensive examples in the `examples/` directory:

### Available Notebooks

1. **`demo_synthetic.ipynb`**: Introduction to DistAwareAug with synthetic data
2. **`compare_smote.ipynb`**: Benchmark comparison with SMOTE, ADASYN, etc.

### Running Examples

```bash
# Install example dependencies
pip install ".[examples]"

# Start Jupyter
jupyter notebook examples/
```

---

## 🔧 Troubleshooting

### Common Issues

#### 1. **Low Diversity / Few Samples Generated**

**Problem**: `diversity_threshold` is too high for your feature scales.

**Solution**: Scale your features first!
```python
from sklearn.preprocessing import StandardScaler

scaler = StandardScaler()
X_train_scaled = scaler.fit_transform(X_train)

augmentor = DistAwareAugmentor(diversity_threshold=0.1)
X_resampled, y_resampled = augmentor.fit_resample(X_train_scaled, y_train)
```

#### 2. **Singular Matrix Errors**

**Problem**: Too few samples or perfectly correlated features.

**Solution**: DistAwareAug handles this automatically, but you can:
- Use `distribution_method='gaussian'` which adds regularization
- Ensure sufficient samples (>10 per class recommended)
- Remove perfectly correlated features

#### 3. **Slow Performance**

**Problem**: KDE is slow for large datasets.

**Solution**: Use Gaussian method for speed:
```python
augmentor = DistAwareAugmentor(distribution_method='gaussian')
```

#### 4. **Import Errors**

**Problem**: Missing dependencies.

**Solution**:
```bash
pip install -e ".[all]"
```

---

## 📈 Performance Tips

1. **Scale your features** with `StandardScaler` for consistent `diversity_threshold` behavior
2. **Use `distribution_method='gaussian'`** for large datasets (10x faster than KDE)
3. **Adjust `diversity_threshold`**:
   - Higher (0.2-0.5): More diverse, fewer samples
   - Lower (0.05-0.1): More samples, less diversity
4. **Set `random_state`** for reproducible results
5. **Start with small datasets** to tune parameters before scaling up

---

## 📄 License

This project is licensed under the MIT License - see the [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for details.

---

## 🙏 Acknowledgments

- Inspired by SMOTE and related oversampling techniques
- Built with scikit-learn, NumPy, SciPy, and pandas
- Thanks to the open-source community

---

## 📬 Contact

- **Author**: Atunrase Ayo
- **Email**: atunraseayomide@gmail.com
- **GitHub**: [@Ayo-Cyber](https://github.com/Ayo-Cyber)
- **Repository**: [DistAwareAug](https://github.com/Ayo-Cyber/DistAwareAug)

---

## 📚 Citation

If you use DistAwareAug in your research, please cite:

```bibtex
@software{distawareaug2025,
  author = {Atunrase, Ayo},
  title = {DistAwareAug: Distribution-Aware Data Augmentation for Imbalanced Learning},
  year = {2025},
  publisher = {GitHub},
  url = {https://github.com/Ayo-Cyber/DistAwareAug}
}
```

---

## 🗺️ Roadmap

- [ ] Publish to PyPI
- [ ] Add more distribution methods (t-distribution, mixture models)
- [ ] GPU acceleration for large-scale augmentation
- [ ] Web-based interactive demo
- [ ] Integration with popular ML frameworks (PyTorch, TensorFlow)
- [ ] Automated hyperparameter tuning
- [ ] Real-world dataset benchmarks

---

<div align="center">

**⭐ Star this repo if you find it useful! ⭐**

[Report Bug](https://github.com/Ayo-Cyber/DistAwareAug/issues) •
[Request Feature](https://github.com/Ayo-Cyber/DistAwareAug/issues) •
[Contribute](https://github.com/Ayo-Cyber/DistAwareAug/pulls)

</div>
